---
published: false
title: Blogging with Jekyll
summary: My experiences of blogging with the Jekyll Ruby library, and not looking back.
created_at: 2009-10-19 11:47:30.087920 +00:00
blog_post:  true
layout: post
extension: html
filter:
  - textile
---
h3. Blogger's Block

I very rarely blog. I've posted a total of three times in the past eighteen months. Even when I have things to blog about, and I even start a post, other things get in the way and the posts get left on the shelf. I've decided that this is due to two things:

# I don't feel like anyone will want to read a post unless I've spent hours crafting it, and...
# _Editing posts in Wordpress is a chore_.

Browser-based text-editing is a problem as old as the web, and Wordpress comes with one of the best JavaScript WYSIWYG editors, "TinyMCE":http://tinymce.moxiecode.com/. Tiny is as good a browser-based editor as I've seen, but I've still never been able to get it to work without resorting to editing the HTML manually. That ruins my flow, and in the end the post doesn't get written because I've spent as much time moving text and tags around as I have putting words down.

h3. Textile

I _love_ Textile, and always have. I think non-techincal users should give it (or a similar markup generator) a go. This blog post (allbeit on a website for a Ruby Textile library) agrees with me: "WYSI-Dangerous - Why WYSIWYG editors are bad for your website":http://redcloth.org/articles/wysi-dangerous-why-wysiwyg-editors-are-bad-for-your-website/.

When I see someone struggling with Word I know their life would be so much easier if they just spent an hour (if that) learning Textile and used it for formatting their documents. In the past I have written Ruby code to generate HTML documentation from a Textile source in order to avoid using Word. The documentation was much the better for it. (I plan to upload this to GitHub some day, under the name "Word Must Die.")

h3. Jekyll

And so I discovered Jekyll. This isn't the first static site generator written in Ruby that I've played with ("StaticMatic":http://staticmatic.rubyforge.org/ and "webby":http://webby.rubyforge.org/ being the others), but the big difference is that this one is built into GitHub, meaning that all I have to do to update the site is push to there. That is a big plus.

As the site is now stored as a Git repository I can edit it locally. Another big plus.
 
Jekyll also uses the Python library Pygments for syntax highlighting, which seems to support every language I could ever imagine blogging about.
